.TH VOIRS-CLI-SYNTHESIZE 1 "2025-07-05" "voirs-cli" "VoiRS CLI Manual"

.SH NAME
voirs-cli-synthesize \- Convert text to speech using VoiRS synthesis engine

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voirs-cli synthesize
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I TEXT
[\fB\-o\fR|\fB\-\-output\fR \fIFILE\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The synthesize command converts text to speech using the VoiRS synthesis engine. It supports various input methods, voice selection, quality settings, and output formats. The command can process plain text or SSML (Speech Synthesis Markup Language) input.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-o, \-\-output \fIFILE\fR
Specify output file path. If not provided, audio will be played directly.

.TP
.B \-v, \-\-voice \fIVOICE\fR
Select voice for synthesis. Use 'voirs-cli voices' to list available voices.

.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quality \fILEVEL\fR
Set synthesis quality level. Options: low, medium, high, ultra (default: medium).

.TP
.B \-f, \-\-format \fIFORMAT\fR
Output audio format. Options: wav, mp3, flac, opus, ogg (default: wav).

.TP
.B \-\-speed \fIRATE\fR
Speaking rate adjustment. Range: 0.1 to 3.0 (default: 1.0).

.TP
.B \-\-pitch \fIFACTOR\fR
Pitch modification factor. Range: 0.1 to 2.0 (default: 1.0).

.TP
.B \-\-volume \fILEVEL\fR
Volume control. Range: 0.0 to 2.0 (default: 1.0).

.TP
.B \-\-sample-rate \fIRATE\fR
Audio sample rate in Hz. Common values: 16000, 22050, 44100, 48000.

.TP
.B \-\-enhance
Enable audio enhancement processing for improved quality.

.TP
.B \-\-ssml
Treat input as SSML markup. Automatically detected if input contains SSML tags.

.TP
.B \-\-validate-ssml
Validate SSML markup without performing synthesis.

.TP
.B \-\-streaming
Enable streaming synthesis for long texts with chunk-based processing.

.TP
.B \-\-chunk-size \fISIZE\fR
Size of text chunks for streaming synthesis (default: 1000 characters).

.TP
.B \-\-no-play
Don't play audio automatically, only save to file.

.TP
.B \-\-metadata
Include synthesis metadata in output file.

.SH INPUT METHODS
.TP
.B Command line argument
Provide text directly as command argument.

.TP
.B Standard input
Read text from stdin using pipe or redirection.

.TP
.B File input
Read text from file using '@filename' syntax.

.SH SSML SUPPORT
The synthesize command supports SSML (Speech Synthesis Markup Language) for advanced speech control:

.TP
.B <speak>
Root element for SSML content.

.TP
.B <prosody>
Control speech rate, pitch, and volume.

.TP
.B <break>
Insert pauses in speech.

.TP
.B <emphasis>
Add emphasis to words or phrases.

.TP
.B <phoneme>
Specify phonetic pronunciation.

.TP
.B <say-as>
Control how text is interpreted (numbers, dates, etc.).

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B Basic synthesis
voirs-cli synthesize "Hello, world!" -o greeting.wav

.TP
.B Voice and quality selection
voirs-cli synthesize "Welcome to VoiRS" --voice en-US-female-1 --quality high

.TP
.B SSML synthesis
voirs-cli synthesize '<speak><prosody rate="slow">Hello there!</prosody></speak>' --format mp3

.TP
.B Speed and pitch adjustment
voirs-cli synthesize "Fast speech" --speed 1.5 --pitch 1.2 --format flac

.TP
.B File input
voirs-cli synthesize @story.txt --output audiobook.mp3 --streaming

.TP
.B Stdin input
echo "Piped text" | voirs-cli synthesize --voice en-GB-male-1

.TP
.B SSML validation
voirs-cli synthesize '<speak><break time="1s"/>Hello</speak>' --validate-ssml

.TP
.B Enhanced quality
voirs-cli synthesize "High quality speech" --quality ultra --enhance --sample-rate 48000

.SH STREAMING MODE
For long texts, streaming mode processes content in chunks:

.TP
.B Advantages
- Lower memory usage
- Faster time-to-first-audio
- Progress indication for long texts
- Concurrent processing of chunks

.TP
.B Usage
voirs-cli synthesize @long-document.txt --streaming --chunk-size 2000

.SH AUDIO FORMATS
.TP
.B WAV
Uncompressed audio, best quality, larger file size.

.TP
.B MP3
Compressed audio, good quality, smaller file size.

.TP
.B FLAC
Lossless compression, excellent quality, moderate file size.

.TP
.B Opus
Modern codec, excellent compression, good for streaming.

.TP
.B OGG
Open-source codec, good compression, cross-platform.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful synthesis.

.TP
.B 1
General error or invalid usage.

.TP
.B 2
Voice not found or not available.

.TP
.B 3
Invalid SSML markup.

.TP
.B 4
Audio processing error.

.TP
.B 5
File I/O error.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR voirs-cli (1),
.BR voirs-cli-voices (1),
.BR voirs-cli-batch (1),
.BR voirs-cli-interactive (1)