.TH VOIRS-CLI 1 "2025-07-05" "voirs-cli" "VoiRS CLI Manual"

.SH NAME
voirs-cli \- Command-line interface for the VoiRS text-to-speech synthesis system

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voirs-cli
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I COMMAND
[\fICOMMAND_OPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
VoiRS CLI is a comprehensive command-line interface for the VoiRS (Voice Synthesis) system, providing high-quality text-to-speech synthesis with advanced features including SSML support, voice management, batch processing, and interactive modes.

.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output with detailed information about operations.

.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress non-essential output, showing only errors and critical information.

.TP
.B \-c, \-\-config \fIFILE\fR
Use a custom configuration file instead of the default location.

.TP
.B \-\-version
Display version information and exit.

.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show help information and exit.

.SH COMMANDS
.SS SYNTHESIS COMMANDS
.TP
.B synthesize, synth
Synthesize text to speech with various options and formats.

.TP
.B interactive, i
Start interactive mode for real-time text-to-speech synthesis.

.TP
.B batch
Process multiple text files in batch mode with parallel processing.

.SS VOICE MANAGEMENT
.TP
.B voices
List available voices with filtering and search capabilities.

.TP
.B voice-search
Search for voices based on text queries and criteria.

.SS MODEL MANAGEMENT
.TP
.B models
Manage acoustic and vocoder models with listing, download, and optimization.

.SS CONFIGURATION
.TP
.B config
Manage configuration settings, profiles, and preferences.

.TP
.B completion
Generate and install shell completion scripts for bash, zsh, fish, and PowerShell.

.SS SERVER MODE
.TP
.B server
Start HTTP server mode for REST API access to synthesis functionality.

.SS HELP AND GUIDANCE
.TP
.B guide
Display getting started guide and command-specific help.

.SH CONFIGURATION
VoiRS CLI uses a hierarchical configuration system:

.TP
.B System-wide configuration
/etc/voirs/config.toml (Linux/macOS)
C:\\ProgramData\\VoiRS\\config.toml (Windows)

.TP
.B User configuration
~/.config/voirs/config.toml (Linux/macOS)
%APPDATA%\\VoiRS\\config.toml (Windows)

.TP
.B Project configuration
./voirs.toml (current directory)

.TP
.B Environment variables
VOIRS_CONFIG_PATH, VOIRS_VOICE, VOIRS_QUALITY, etc.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B Basic synthesis
voirs-cli synthesize "Hello, world!" -o output.wav

.TP
.B Voice selection
voirs-cli synthesize "Welcome to VoiRS" --voice en-US-female-1 --quality high

.TP
.B SSML synthesis
voirs-cli synthesize '<speak><prosody rate="slow">Hello there!</prosody></speak>' --format mp3

.TP
.B Batch processing
voirs-cli batch input.txt --output-dir results/ --workers 4

.TP
.B Interactive mode
voirs-cli interactive

.TP
.B Voice search
voirs-cli voice-search "female English"

.TP
.B Server mode
voirs-cli server --port 8080 --host 0.0.0.0

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B VOIRS_CONFIG_PATH
Path to configuration file.

.TP
.B VOIRS_VOICE
Default voice to use for synthesis.

.TP
.B VOIRS_QUALITY
Default quality level (low, medium, high, ultra).

.TP
.B VOIRS_OUTPUT_FORMAT
Default output format (wav, mp3, flac, opus, ogg).

.TP
.B VOIRS_MODELS_PATH
Directory containing voice and model files.

.TP
.B VOIRS_CACHE_PATH
Directory for caching downloaded models and temporary files.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/voirs/config.toml
User configuration file.

.TP
.B ~/.config/voirs/profiles/
Directory containing configuration profiles.

.TP
.B ~/.cache/voirs/
Cache directory for models and temporary files.

.TP
.B ~/.local/share/voirs/
User data directory for downloaded models.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion.

.TP
.B 1
General error or invalid usage.

.TP
.B 2
Configuration error.

.TP
.B 3
Model or voice not found.

.TP
.B 4
Audio processing error.

.TP
.B 5
Network or download error.

.SH AUTHOR
VoiRS Development Team

.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/voirs-project/voirs/issues

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2025 VoiRS Project. Licensed under the MIT License.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR voirs-cli-synthesize (1),
.BR voirs-cli-voices (1),
.BR voirs-cli-models (1),
.BR voirs-cli-batch (1),
.BR voirs-cli-interactive (1),
.BR voirs-cli-server (1),
.BR voirs-cli-config (1),
.BR voirs-cli-test (1),
.BR voirs-cli-guide (1),
.BR voirs-cli-completion (1)