.TH VOIRS-CLI-CONFIG 1 "2025-07-05" "voirs-cli" "VoiRS CLI Manual"

.SH NAME
voirs-cli-config \- Manage VoiRS configuration settings and profiles

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voirs-cli config
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fISUBCOMMAND\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The config command provides comprehensive configuration management for VoiRS CLI, including settings management, profile handling, and preference configuration. It supports hierarchical configuration loading and environment variable integration.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B show
Display current configuration settings (default subcommand).

.TP
.B get \fIKEY\fR
Get value of a specific configuration key.

.TP
.B set \fIKEY\fR \fIVALUE\fR
Set value of a specific configuration key.

.TP
.B unset \fIKEY\fR
Remove a configuration key.

.TP
.B reset
Reset configuration to default values.

.TP
.B export \fIFILE\fR
Export current configuration to file.

.TP
.B import \fIFILE\fR
Import configuration from file.

.TP
.B validate
Validate current configuration.

.TP
.B profile
Manage configuration profiles.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-format \fIFORMAT\fR
Output format: table, json, yaml, toml (default: table).

.TP
.B \-\-global
Operate on global configuration.

.TP
.B \-\-user
Operate on user configuration.

.TP
.B \-\-local
Operate on local/project configuration.

.TP
.B \-\-file \fIFILE\fR
Use specific configuration file.

.TP
.B \-\-no-defaults
Don't include default values in output.

.TP
.B \-\-comments
Include comments in exported configuration.

.SH PROFILE MANAGEMENT
.TP
.B profile list
List all configuration profiles.

.TP
.B profile show \fIPROFILE\fR
Show profile information.

.TP
.B profile create \fINAME\fR
Create new configuration profile.

.TP
.B profile copy \fISOURCE\fR \fIDEST\fR
Copy profile to new profile.

.TP
.B profile switch \fIPROFILE\fR
Switch to specified profile.

.TP
.B profile delete \fIPROFILE\fR
Delete configuration profile.

.TP
.B profile export \fIPROFILE\fR \fIFILE\fR
Export profile to file.

.TP
.B profile import \fIFILE\fR [\fINAME\fR]
Import profile from file.

.SH CONFIGURATION KEYS
.SS SYNTHESIS SETTINGS
.TP
.B voice
Default voice for synthesis operations.

.TP
.B quality
Default quality level: low, medium, high, ultra.

.TP
.B format
Default audio format: wav, mp3, flac, opus, ogg.

.TP
.B sample_rate
Default sample rate in Hz.

.TP
.B speed
Default speaking speed (0.1 to 3.0).

.TP
.B pitch
Default pitch factor (0.1 to 2.0).

.TP
.B volume
Default volume level (0.0 to 2.0).

.SS DIRECTORY SETTINGS
.TP
.B models_path
Directory containing voice models.

.TP
.B cache_path
Directory for caching temporary files.

.TP
.B output_path
Default output directory for audio files.

.TP
.B config_path
Configuration file directory.

.SS PROCESSING SETTINGS
.TP
.B workers
Number of parallel processing workers.

.TP
.B chunk_size
Text chunk size for streaming synthesis.

.TP
.B timeout
Operation timeout in seconds.

.TP
.B max_retries
Maximum number of retry attempts.

.SS INTERFACE SETTINGS
.TP
.B verbose
Enable verbose output by default.

.TP
.B progress
Show progress indicators.

.TP
.B colors
Enable colored output.

.TP
.B interactive_auto_play
Auto-play audio in interactive mode.

.SS SERVER SETTINGS
.TP
.B server.port
Default server port.

.TP
.B server.host
Default server host.

.TP
.B server.auth
Enable authentication by default.

.TP
.B server.rate_limit
Default rate limit per minute.

.SH CONFIGURATION HIERARCHY
Configuration is loaded in the following order (later values override earlier):

.TP
.B 1. Built-in defaults
Hard-coded default values.

.TP
.B 2. System configuration
/etc/voirs/config.toml (Unix) or system-wide location (Windows).

.TP
.B 3. User configuration
~/.config/voirs/config.toml (Unix) or user AppData (Windows).

.TP
.B 4. Project configuration
./voirs.toml in current directory.

.TP
.B 5. Environment variables
Variables starting with VOIRS_ (e.g., VOIRS_VOICE).

.TP
.B 6. Command line arguments
Explicit command line flags and options.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B VOIRS_CONFIG_PATH
Path to configuration file.

.TP
.B VOIRS_VOICE
Default voice setting.

.TP
.B VOIRS_QUALITY
Default quality setting.

.TP
.B VOIRS_FORMAT
Default format setting.

.TP
.B VOIRS_MODELS_PATH
Models directory path.

.TP
.B VOIRS_CACHE_PATH
Cache directory path.

.TP
.B VOIRS_WORKERS
Number of workers.

.TP
.B VOIRS_VERBOSE
Enable verbose output (true/false).

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B Show current configuration
voirs-cli config show

.TP
.B Get specific setting
voirs-cli config get voice

.TP
.B Set default voice
voirs-cli config set voice en-US-female-1

.TP
.B Set quality level
voirs-cli config set quality high

.TP
.B Reset to defaults
voirs-cli config reset

.TP
.B Export configuration
voirs-cli config export my-config.toml

.TP
.B Import configuration
voirs-cli config import my-config.toml

.TP
.B JSON output
voirs-cli config show --format json

.TP
.B User-level setting
voirs-cli config set --user voice en-GB-male-1

.TP
.B Create profile
voirs-cli config profile create production

.TP
.B Switch profile
voirs-cli config profile switch production

.TP
.B List profiles
voirs-cli config profile list

.SS CONFIGURATION FILE EXAMPLE
.nf
# VoiRS Configuration File
# ~/.config/voirs/config.toml

[synthesis]
voice = "en-US-female-1"
quality = "high"
format = "wav"
sample_rate = 22050
speed = 1.0
pitch = 1.0
volume = 1.0

[directories]
models_path = "~/.local/share/voirs/models"
cache_path = "~/.cache/voirs"
output_path = "~/voirs-output"

[processing]
workers = 4
chunk_size = 1000
timeout = 300
max_retries = 3

[interface]
verbose = false
progress = true
colors = true
interactive_auto_play = true

[server]
port = 3000
host = "127.0.0.1"
auth = false
rate_limit = 100
.fi

.SH PROFILE SYSTEM
.TP
.B Profile types
- System profiles: Shared across all users
- User profiles: Personal to current user
- Project profiles: Specific to current project

.TP
.B Profile metadata
- Name and description
- Creation and modification dates
- Tags for organization
- Usage statistics

.TP
.B Profile inheritance
Profiles can inherit from other profiles with override capability.

.SH VALIDATION
.TP
.B Schema validation
Configuration is validated against built-in schema.

.TP
.B Value validation
Values are checked for correct type and range.

.TP
.B Dependency validation
Related settings are validated for consistency.

.TP
.B Error reporting
Validation errors include context and suggestions.

.SH MIGRATION
.TP
.B Version compatibility
Automatic migration of old configuration formats.

.TP
.B Backup creation
Backups are created before migration.

.TP
.B Rollback capability
Failed migrations can be rolled back.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/voirs/config.toml
User configuration file.

.TP
.B ~/.config/voirs/profiles/
Directory containing configuration profiles.

.TP
.B ./voirs.toml
Project-specific configuration file.

.TP
.B /etc/voirs/config.toml
System-wide configuration file (Unix systems).

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Configuration operation successful.

.TP
.B 1
General configuration error.

.TP
.B 2
Configuration file not found.

.TP
.B 3
Invalid configuration format.

.TP
.B 4
Configuration validation failed.

.TP
.B 5
Profile operation failed.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR voirs-cli (1),
.BR voirs-cli-synthesize (1),
.BR voirs-cli-voices (1),
.BR voirs-cli-server (1)