.TH VOIRS-CLI-GUIDE 1 "2025-07-05" "voirs-cli" "VoiRS CLI Manual"

.SH NAME
voirs-cli-guide \- Display contextual help, tutorials, and getting started information

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voirs-cli guide
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fICOMMAND\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The guide command provides comprehensive help and tutorial information for VoiRS CLI. It offers context-sensitive help, getting started tutorials, command examples, and troubleshooting guidance to help users master the VoiRS text-to-speech system.

Unlike the standard \fB\-\-help\fR option which provides brief usage information, the guide command offers detailed explanations, practical examples, and step-by-step instructions for common workflows.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I COMMAND
Show detailed help for a specific command. Supported commands include synthesize, voices, models, batch, interactive, server, config, and others.

.TP
.B \-\-getting-started
Display the getting started guide with installation verification, first synthesis, and basic configuration.

.TP
.B \-\-examples
Show comprehensive examples for all commands with explanations and expected outputs.

.TP
.B \-\-workflow \fIWORKFLOW\fR
Display help for specific workflows:
- synthesis: Basic text-to-speech synthesis
- batch: Bulk processing workflows
- voices: Voice management and selection
- server: Setting up HTTP API server
- config: Configuration and customization

.TP
.B \-\-troubleshooting
Show common issues and their solutions, including performance tuning and error resolution.

.TP
.B \-\-tips
Display productivity tips, advanced features, and best practices.

.TP
.B \-\-format \fIFORMAT\fR
Output format for guide content:
- text: Plain text (default)
- markdown: Markdown formatted output
- html: HTML formatted output

.SH GUIDE CONTENT

.SS Getting Started Guide
The getting started guide covers:

.TP
.B Installation verification
Testing that VoiRS is properly installed and configured.

.TP
.B First synthesis
Step-by-step instructions for your first text-to-speech conversion.

.TP
.B Voice selection
How to list, download, and use different voices.

.TP
.B Configuration
Setting up preferences, quality levels, and output formats.

.SS Command-Specific Help
Detailed help for each command includes:

.TP
.B Purpose and use cases
When and why to use the command.

.TP
.B Option explanations
Detailed descriptions of all command-line options.

.TP
.B Practical examples
Real-world usage examples with expected outputs.

.TP
.B Related commands
Cross-references to related functionality.

.SS Workflow Guides
Comprehensive workflows covering:

.TP
.B Basic synthesis
Single-file text-to-speech conversion.

.TP
.B Batch processing
Processing multiple files efficiently.

.TP
.B Voice customization
Selecting and customizing voices for different use cases.

.TP
.B Quality optimization
Balancing quality and performance for your needs.

.TP
.B Server deployment
Setting up VoiRS as a service or API.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
.B Show general help overview
voirs-cli guide

.TP
.B Display getting started guide
voirs-cli guide --getting-started

.TP
.B Get help for specific command
voirs-cli guide synthesize

.TP
.B Show all command examples
voirs-cli guide --examples

.TP
.B Display batch processing workflow
voirs-cli guide --workflow batch

.TP
.B Show troubleshooting information
voirs-cli guide --troubleshooting

.TP
.B Get productivity tips
voirs-cli guide --tips

.TP
.B Export guide as markdown
voirs-cli guide --format markdown > voirs-guide.md

.SH COMMAND-SPECIFIC GUIDES

.SS Synthesis Guide
.TP
.B Basic usage
Simple text-to-speech conversion with default settings.

.TP
.B Voice selection
Choosing appropriate voices for different content types.

.TP
.B Quality settings
Understanding and selecting quality levels.

.TP
.B SSML support
Using Speech Synthesis Markup Language for enhanced control.

.SS Voice Management Guide
.TP
.B Voice discovery
Finding voices for specific languages and use cases.

.TP
.B Voice installation
Downloading and installing voice models.

.TP
.B Voice comparison
Evaluating different voices for your needs.

.SS Batch Processing Guide
.TP
.B File organization
Preparing input files and directory structures.

.TP
.B Performance tuning
Optimizing parallel processing and resource usage.

.TP
.B Resume functionality
Handling interruptions and resuming large batches.

.SS Server Deployment Guide
.TP
.B Server setup
Starting and configuring the HTTP API server.

.TP
.B API usage
Making requests to the synthesis API.

.TP
.B Authentication
Setting up API keys and access control.

.TP
.B Performance monitoring
Monitoring server health and performance.

.SH TROUBLESHOOTING TOPICS

.SS Installation Issues
- Model download failures
- Configuration file problems
- Permission and path issues

.SS Performance Problems
- Slow synthesis speed
- High memory usage
- GPU acceleration setup

.SS Quality Concerns
- Audio artifacts or distortion
- Voice quality optimization
- Format conversion issues

.SS Integration Challenges
- Server API integration
- Batch processing optimization
- Configuration management

.SH OUTPUT FORMATS

.SS Text Format (Default)
Plain text output suitable for terminal display with:
- Clear section headers
- Proper indentation
- Code examples with syntax highlighting
- Cross-references to related topics

.SS Markdown Format
Structured markdown output for:
- Documentation generation
- Web publishing
- Integration with documentation systems

.SS HTML Format
Rich HTML output featuring:
- Interactive navigation
- Syntax-highlighted code examples
- Embedded links and references

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/voirs/guide-preferences.toml
User preferences for guide display and formatting.

.TP
.B ~/.cache/voirs/guide-cache/
Cached guide content for faster access.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B VOIRS_GUIDE_PAGER
Pager to use for displaying long guide content (default: less).

.TP
.B VOIRS_GUIDE_BROWSER
Browser to open HTML-formatted guides.

.TP
.B VOIRS_GUIDE_EDITOR
Editor for opening guide content for reference.

.SH INTEGRATION
The guide system integrates with:

.TP
.B Built-in help
Extends standard \fB\-\-help\fR with detailed explanations.

.TP
.B Manual pages
Complements manual pages with interactive examples.

.TP
.B Error messages
Provides contextual help when errors occur.

.TP
.B Configuration system
Offers guidance on configuration options and values.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR voirs-cli (1),
.BR voirs-cli-synthesize (1),
.BR voirs-cli-voices (1),
.BR voirs-cli-models (1),
.BR voirs-cli-batch (1),
.BR voirs-cli-interactive (1),
.BR voirs-cli-server (1),
.BR voirs-cli-config (1)

.SH AUTHOR
VoiRS Development Team

.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/voirs-project/voirs/issues