.TH VOIRS-CLI-INTERACTIVE 1 "2025-07-05" "voirs-cli" "VoiRS CLI Manual"

.SH NAME
voirs-cli-interactive \- Interactive mode for real-time text-to-speech synthesis

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voirs-cli interactive
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The interactive command starts an interactive shell session for real-time text-to-speech synthesis. It provides immediate audio playback, voice switching, parameter adjustment, and session management capabilities.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-voice \fIVOICE\fR
Initial voice for the interactive session.

.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quality \fILEVEL\fR
Initial quality level: low, medium, high, ultra (default: medium).

.TP
.B \-f, \-\-format \fIFORMAT\fR
Audio format for saved files: wav, mp3, flac, opus, ogg (default: wav).

.TP
.B \-\-no-play
Disable automatic audio playback.

.TP
.B \-\-no-history
Disable command history tracking.

.TP
.B \-\-session-file \fIFILE\fR
Load or save session to specific file.

.TP
.B \-\-auto-save
Enable automatic session saving.

.TP
.B \-\-device \fIDEVICE\fR
Select audio output device for playback.

.TP
.B \-\-buffer-size \fISIZE\fR
Audio buffer size in samples (default: 1024).

.SH INTERACTIVE COMMANDS
.SS SYNTHESIS COMMANDS
.TP
.B \fITEXT\fR
Synthesize text directly. Any text not starting with ':' will be synthesized.

.TP
.B :synth \fITEXT\fR
Explicit synthesis command (same as typing text directly).

.TP
.B :ssml \fISSML_TEXT\fR
Synthesize SSML markup content.

.SS VOICE COMMANDS
.TP
.B :voice
Display current voice information.

.TP
.B :voice \fIVOICE_NAME\fR
Switch to specified voice.

.TP
.B :voices
List all available voices.

.TP
.B :voice-search \fIQUERY\fR
Search for voices matching query.

.SS PARAMETER COMMANDS
.TP
.B :speed
Show current speaking speed.

.TP
.B :speed \fIRATE\fR
Set speaking speed (0.1 to 3.0).

.TP
.B :pitch
Show current pitch level.

.TP
.B :pitch \fIFACTOR\fR
Set pitch factor (0.1 to 2.0).

.TP
.B :volume
Show current volume level.

.TP
.B :volume \fILEVEL\fR
Set volume level (0.0 to 2.0).

.TP
.B :quality
Show current quality level.

.TP
.B :quality \fILEVEL\fR
Set quality level (low, medium, high, ultra).

.TP
.B :format
Show current audio format.

.TP
.B :format \fIFORMAT\fR
Set audio format (wav, mp3, flac, opus, ogg).

.SS SESSION COMMANDS
.TP
.B :save
Save current session to default file.

.TP
.B :save \fIFILE\fR
Save current session to specified file.

.TP
.B :load \fIFILE\fR
Load session from specified file.

.TP
.B :history
Show synthesis history for current session.

.TP
.B :export \fIFORMAT\fR [\fIFILE\fR]
Export session history (json, csv, txt).

.TP
.B :clear
Clear synthesis history.

.TP
.B :stats
Show session statistics.

.SS UTILITY COMMANDS
.TP
.B :help
Show interactive command help.

.TP
.B :status
Show current session status and settings.

.TP
.B :devices
List available audio output devices.

.TP
.B :device \fIDEVICE\fR
Switch to specified audio device.

.TP
.B :test
Test current voice with sample text.

.TP
.B :quit, :exit, :q
Exit interactive mode.

.SH KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS
.TP
.B Ctrl+C
Cancel current synthesis operation.

.TP
.B Ctrl+D
Exit interactive mode.

.TP
.B Up/Down arrows
Navigate command history.

.TP
.B Tab
Command completion (where supported).

.TP
.B Ctrl+L
Clear terminal screen.

.SH SESSION MANAGEMENT
.TP
.B Automatic saving
Sessions can be automatically saved with --auto-save flag.

.TP
.B History tracking
All synthesis operations are tracked with timestamps.

.TP
.B Export formats
- JSON: Complete session data with metadata
- CSV: Tabular format for analysis
- TXT: Plain text transcript

.TP
.B Statistics
- Total synthesis operations
- Time spent in session
- Voice usage statistics
- Average processing times

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B Start interactive mode
voirs-cli interactive

.TP
.B Start with specific voice
voirs-cli interactive --voice en-US-female-1

.TP
.B Start with session file
voirs-cli interactive --session-file my-session.json

.TP
.B Disable auto-play
voirs-cli interactive --no-play

.SS INTERACTIVE SESSION EXAMPLE
.nf
$ voirs-cli interactive
VoiRS Interactive Mode
Voice: en-US-female-1 | Quality: medium | Format: wav
Type ':help' for commands, ':quit' to exit

> Hello, world!
[Audio plays: "Hello, world!"]

> :voice en-GB-male-1
Voice changed to: en-GB-male-1

> :speed 1.5
Speed set to: 1.5

> Welcome to VoiRS interactive mode
[Audio plays with increased speed]

> :save my-session.json
Session saved to: my-session.json

> :history
1. 2025-07-05 10:30:15 - "Hello, world!" (en-US-female-1)
2. 2025-07-05 10:30:45 - "Welcome to VoiRS interactive mode" (en-GB-male-1)

> :quit
Goodbye!
.fi

.SH VOICE SWITCHING
.TP
.B Real-time switching
Voices can be changed during the session without restart.

.TP
.B Voice validation
Invalid voice names are rejected with suggestions.

.TP
.B Voice search
Use :voice-search to find voices matching criteria.

.SH AUDIO PLAYBACK
.TP
.B Immediate playback
Synthesized audio plays immediately after generation.

.TP
.B Device selection
Choose specific audio output device.

.TP
.B Playback control
Disable playback with --no-play for file-only output.

.TP
.B Buffer management
Configurable audio buffer size for low-latency playback.

.SH PARAMETER ADJUSTMENT
All synthesis parameters can be adjusted in real-time:

.TP
.B Speaking speed
Range: 0.1 (very slow) to 3.0 (very fast)

.TP
.B Pitch factor
Range: 0.1 (very low) to 2.0 (very high)

.TP
.B Volume level
Range: 0.0 (mute) to 2.0 (amplified)

.TP
.B Quality level
Options: low, medium, high, ultra

.SH ERROR HANDLING
.TP
.B Synthesis errors
Errors are displayed with context, session continues.

.TP
.B Voice errors
Invalid voices are rejected with suggestions.

.TP
.B Parameter errors
Invalid parameters are rejected with valid ranges.

.TP
.B Recovery
Session state is preserved even after errors.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/voirs/interactive-session.json
Default session file location.

.TP
.B ~/.config/voirs/interactive-history.json
Command history file.

.TP
.B ~/.config/voirs/interactive-preferences.toml
Interactive mode preferences.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit.

.TP
.B 1
Error during initialization.

.TP
.B 2
Configuration error.

.TP
.B 3
Audio system error.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR voirs-cli (1),
.BR voirs-cli-synthesize (1),
.BR voirs-cli-voices (1),
.BR voirs-cli-config (1)