.TH VOIRS-CLI-VOICES 1 "2025-07-05" "voirs-cli" "VoiRS CLI Manual"

.SH NAME
voirs-cli-voices \- List and manage available voices for text-to-speech synthesis

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voirs-cli voices
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fISUBCOMMAND\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The voices command provides comprehensive voice management capabilities for the VoiRS text-to-speech system. It allows listing available voices, viewing detailed voice information, downloading new voices, and searching for voices based on various criteria.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B list
List all available voices with filtering options (default subcommand).

.TP
.B info \fIVOICE\fR
Display detailed information about a specific voice.

.TP
.B download \fIVOICE\fR
Download a voice from the model repository.

.TP
.B search \fIQUERY\fR
Search for voices using text queries and criteria.

.SH OPTIONS
.SS LIST OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-language \fILANG\fR
Filter voices by language code (e.g., en-US, fr-FR, ja-JP).

.TP
.B \-g, \-\-gender \fIGENDER\fR
Filter voices by gender (male, female, neutral).

.TP
.B \-s, \-\-style \fISTYLE\fR
Filter voices by speaking style (formal, casual, expressive, etc.).

.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quality \fILEVEL\fR
Filter voices by quality level (low, medium, high, ultra).

.TP
.B \-\-installed
Show only installed voices.

.TP
.B \-\-available
Show only available voices for download.

.TP
.B \-\-detailed
Show detailed information for each voice.

.TP
.B \-\-format \fIFORMAT\fR
Output format: table, json, csv (default: table).

.SS INFO OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-samples
Include audio samples in the information display.

.TP
.B \-\-technical
Show technical specifications and model details.

.TP
.B \-\-usage
Display usage examples and recommended settings.

.SS DOWNLOAD OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-verify
Verify downloaded files using checksums.

.TP
.B \-\-resume
Resume interrupted downloads.

.TP
.B \-\-force
Force re-download even if voice is already installed.

.TP
.B \-\-no-progress
Disable progress indicators during download.

.SS SEARCH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-limit \fIN\fR
Limit search results to N voices (default: 10).

.TP
.B \-\-sort \fIFIELD\fR
Sort results by field: name, language, quality, size (default: name).

.TP
.B \-\-recommendations
Show voice recommendations based on query.

.SH VOICE PROPERTIES
.TP
.B Name
Unique identifier for the voice.

.TP
.B Language
Language and region code (e.g., en-US, de-DE).

.TP
.B Gender
Speaker gender: male, female, or neutral.

.TP
.B Style
Speaking style: formal, casual, expressive, robotic, etc.

.TP
.B Quality
Voice quality level: low, medium, high, ultra.

.TP
.B Sample Rate
Audio sample rate in Hz (16000, 22050, 44100, 48000).

.TP
.B Model Size
Size of the voice model files in MB.

.TP
.B Backend
Synthesis backend: ONNX, Candle, or CPU.

.TP
.B Installation Status
Whether the voice is installed, available, or requires download.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B List all voices
voirs-cli voices

.TP
.B List English voices
voirs-cli voices --language en-US

.TP
.B List female voices
voirs-cli voices --gender female

.TP
.B List high-quality voices
voirs-cli voices --quality high --detailed

.TP
.B Show installed voices only
voirs-cli voices --installed

.TP
.B Voice information
voirs-cli voices info en-US-female-1 --technical

.TP
.B Download a voice
voirs-cli voices download en-GB-male-2 --verify

.TP
.B Search for voices
voirs-cli voices search "expressive female English"

.TP
.B JSON output
voirs-cli voices --format json --language ja-JP

.TP
.B Search with recommendations
voirs-cli voices search "news reader" --recommendations --limit 5

.SH VOICE NAMING CONVENTION
Voice names follow the pattern: \fIlanguage\fR-\fIgender\fR-\fInumber\fR[\fI-style\fR]

.TP
.B Examples
en-US-female-1, en-GB-male-2-formal, fr-FR-female-1-expressive

.TP
.B Language codes
en-US (American English), en-GB (British English), fr-FR (French), de-DE (German), ja-JP (Japanese), etc.

.SH VOICE SEARCH
The voice search functionality supports various query formats:

.TP
.B Language queries
"English", "French", "Japanese"

.TP
.B Gender queries
"male", "female", "neutral"

.TP
.B Style queries
"formal", "casual", "expressive", "robotic"

.TP
.B Quality queries
"high quality", "professional", "studio quality"

.TP
.B Combined queries
"high quality female English news reader"

.SH TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS
.TP
.B Model Types
- Acoustic models (text-to-mel spectrogram)
- Vocoder models (mel spectrogram-to-audio)
- End-to-end models (text-to-audio)

.TP
.B Backend Support
- ONNX Runtime for optimized inference
- Candle for native Rust inference
- CPU fallback for compatibility

.TP
.B File Formats
- .onnx for ONNX Runtime models
- .safetensors for Candle models
- .bin for legacy model formats

.SH CONFIGURATION
Voice preferences can be configured in the VoiRS configuration file:

.TP
.B Default voice
Set preferred voice for synthesis operations.

.TP
.B Download mirrors
Configure alternative download sources.

.TP
.B Cache settings
Configure model cache location and size limits.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful operation.

.TP
.B 1
General error or invalid usage.

.TP
.B 2
Voice not found.

.TP
.B 3
Download error or network issue.

.TP
.B 4
Installation or verification error.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.local/share/voirs/voices/
Directory containing installed voice models.

.TP
.B ~/.cache/voirs/downloads/
Temporary directory for voice downloads.

.TP
.B ~/.config/voirs/voice-preferences.toml
User voice preferences and settings.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR voirs-cli (1),
.BR voirs-cli-synthesize (1),
.BR voirs-cli-voice-search (1),
.BR voirs-cli-models (1)